Good day I'm Norman Wildberger this is the second
video in the second part of the series on the
foundations of mathematics and we're turning
our attention to modern pure mathematics and
critiquing it in fact we're putting mathematics
on trial and I have a public prosecutor today
we're going to look at the notion of rigor in
mathematics and I'm going to start to try to
explain why rigor has been decreasing in fact over
the last few hundred years and notably in the last
century this is rather contrary to the public
perception along the way we're going to have a
look at the notion of proof and how it figures in
the story so first of all we might start by saying
what is rigor in mathematics well one online
dictionary defines it this way that rigor is
logical validity or accuracy and that's a pretty
good initial stab at it historically the notion of
rigor has been intimately connected with Euclid's
deductive framework as set out in his book the
elements which was a kind of Bible or road map
for logical mathematical presentation for several
thousand years so the model that Euclid set up and
I've talked earlier in this series about Euclid so
if you haven't watched those videos you can go
back and have a look the basic framework is he
starts with definitions and obvious facts and
the obvious facts are grouped into postulates
and axioms and then with those as the preparation
then he starts with theorems which are statements
of facts and proofs so he states something and
then he proves it from the original obvious facts
and the definitions and then there's an X theorem
and the proof of that and the next theorem a proof
of that and so on there's a logical succession
starting with the simpler theorems and working
the way slowly towards more and more complicated
theorems and the idea is that you're allowed to
use the previous theorems that you've already
proven in the proof of any subsequent theorem so
there's a very important framework that you could
set up and for most people this is still what
rigor means and it's quite a reasonable definition
or approach to what rigor is however in the last
hundred years or so another notion of rigor has
emerged so often when analysts talk about rigor
these days they are referring not so much to
Euclid's framework but rather to a framework
that was set up in the latter part of the 19th
century when mathematicians started investigating
the foundations for analysis and major names
associated to that mikoshi Dedekind wire straws
and there's a particular kind of formulation which
often is associated with the epsilon and delta
limit notions and this framework replaced earlier
usage of infinitesimals which had been considered
dubious by some people and they'll also replace
to some extent the algebraic approach that earlier
generations had adopted towards analysis namely
particularly Euler and LaGrange and then helped on
by Cantor's theory of infinite sets this this sort
of approach became in the 20th century sort of the
standard dogma for analysis and to this day when
an analyst refers to rigor often they are making
some reference to this framework now well there
were some very important ideas here there were
also some rather dubious ideas as we are going
to see later on so for me it's not at all obvious
that this approach should be associated with the
term rigor in fact I'm going to argue something
of the opposite as we go on the notion of rigor is
so important in mathematics that I think we need
to flesh this out a little bit more so here are
some characteristics of rigorous thinking which
I think are particularly valuable first of all
we need careful and precise initial definitions
the definitions that we make we must be very
careful with them not too arbitrary they must
be chosen just the right way and they must be
completely precise we should aim for a minimum
of assumptions when we're starting a theory we may
very well have some assumptions we may for example
assume some prior theories that have already been
created that's fine but we should first of all be
very clear about what our assumptions are and we
should try to aim for a minimum of assumptions and
assumptions that we do make ought to be pretty
reasonable ones the step by step nature of
rigorous mathematics where we're going one step at
a time and each step is logical and clear that's
very important it's easy to make mistakes
even when you're trying hard to be rigorous
when you're trying hard to be careful and so we
need to check our work constantly we need to be
cross-referencing things and looking at things
from different directions to make sure that we
haven't made a mistake so we must be very careful
in mathematics to avoid those little mistakes or
not so little mistakes that can creep into our
theories and one way of keeping them at bay is
to have a thorough working out of examples if we
work through examples we can check our theories
against the examples and there has to be some
kind of correspondence there and if there isn't
well that's meaning that we need to go back and
check something another good way of checking thing
is to try to make lots of computations and make
sure that we do them carefully so we check our
theoretical results against explicit computations
that we've done carefully so the emphasis is on
care on being methodical on being thorough on
being logical and we have to make sure that we're
not leaving any gaps if there's a little logical
gap somewhere there could be an error contained
in that gap could wreck the entire argument so
generally we need to have a critical and skeptical
approach to things we don't just assume things
because people come and say oh look I have proved
a nice new result we say AHA that looks nice now
you show me the proof convince me that it's true
and I'm going to look at it skeptically I'm going
to be critical so as I've mentioned several times
before when we're talking about mathematics and
rigor in mathematics the importance of Euclid's
elements can't be overemphasized up to the
beginning of the 20th century the primary model
for correct mathematical rigor was Euclid's
elements so studying mathematics was almost
synonymous with learning geometry from Euclid
those two terms were pretty close to meaning the
same thing for many generations of students and
mathematicians however in the early 1900's the
situation started to change Euclid was cut back
people started questioning the need to go through
Euclid so carefully so first they started cutting
back the amount of Euclid that was presented and
then gradually other people may text that replaced
Euclid at least partially and then eventually
Euclid was slowly eliminated altogether so that
today Euclid is almost nowhere taught it's a
dramatic departure from the historical record one
that we need to be aware of as a consequence of
that our attitudes towards mathematics education
have changed in a very important way so the basic
model has changed from a logical succession of
theorems and proofs we essentially Euclid's model
to a more flexible assortment of facts and methods
these days students are not so much given a linear
structure where one thing follows from the other
and you need to do things in the right order that
was Euclid's model these days students are rather
given an assortment of facts and the facts are
somewhat flexible you can interchange the order
of them without too much problem the facts are
often only thinly supported by proofs there might
be a little bit of explanation or some examples
to illustrate a fact to give the students some
confidence in the fact but the idea that facts
have to be rigorously demonstrated that is an
idea from yesteryear sadly and instead of proofs
the emphasis has been shifting towards methods
where students now learn how to do things how
to find the eigenvalues of a matrix how to find
the derivative of this how to solve this linear
system of equations how to factor that polynomial
this is considered the main thing that students
have to learn instead of how do you prove that
theorem how do you prove that theorem how do
you go from there to there how do you solve that
problem very different emphasis so this explains
a lot the shift in attitudes to rigor that has
been experienced in the 20th century and it's
been a very market shift in our attitudes towards
rigor not surprisingly the students that have come
through this system are not so concerned with
proofs and so this idea of rigor of having to
formally substantiate facts it doesn't weigh so
heavily upon them and mathematicians having gone
through that system too naturally a little bit
of that rubs off on us even if in higher years
we try to transcend it as a result today in 2012
there are very few college or university courses
which lay out a complete self-contained logical
presentation of a given mathematical subject such
a thing is almost nowhere to be found if your
college or university has such a thing let me
know I'd be kind of interested so I'm looking
for a situation where the professor comes in
on the first day and says we're going to lay out
this subject from first principles to the end of
the course completely on our own we're going to
prove everything that we say and we're not going
to import anything from outside we're not going
to introduce any extra assumptions and going to
prove everything that's something that we don't
see anymore however it would be a great idea it
would be lovely if there were a few more places
that did this you'd have to choose your topics
very carefully because some of the topics it's
impossible to do this because there's inherent
waffling in it pretty well anything with
analysis involved it's very difficult to
do this but some topics that you could do this
with are combinatorics and various branches of
combinatorics so for example lattice theory will
probably nice graph theory a course in Association
schemes or Latin squares or post sets finite
group Theory projective geometry this should be
much more studied rational trigonometry of course
that should be much more studied to linear algebra
number theory so if you have taken such a course
let us know I think that'd be quite interesting we
generally do not take this approach anymore in
undergraduate education in the year 2012 let's
talk a little bit about proof so what is a proof
well a proof of a theorem is a complete logical
derivation of that theorem using prior theorems
and initial assumptions of a theory okay that's
my definition so notice that this notion of
a proof is context dependent that it depends
on this framework of having given theory it's an
important point that in Euclid for example one had
this layout of theorems and the proofs were what
we'll use to go from one theorem to the next and
the proofs were in the context of the theorems
that we've already proven in the modern course
of mathematics say at the university level there
are some proofs but there are also interspersed
periods of discussion and introduction of ideas
and statements of facts where their proofs are
not complete or perhaps not even given at
all so we have a kind of sporadic notion of
logical continuity as a result it becomes in fact
difficult to say clearly what a proof is and many
students find this difficult and understandably
so because the assumed theoretical framework is
ambiguous if I just give you a theorem out of
context and I say prove this theorem then you
don't know what am i allowing you to use how far
back do you expect me to go what other theorems
are you allowed to invoke unless I put it in
a framework and say well you're allowed to use
derivatives but not integrals or you're allowed
to use linear algebra about not operator algebras
etc unless I say something like that then it's
a little bit ambiguous what do you mean by a
proof so this is a very legitimate problem that
many students have in courses they are asked
occasionally especially in the higher courses
for mathematically inclined students they are
asked to do proofs but there's this sort of
floating aspect of what actually that means
here's a very important diagram that I want you
to consider I'm going to call it the hierarchy
of mathematical topics so it's on somewhat grand
this is a very conceptual diagram it's not meant
to be taken literally at all what this does is it
tries to represent the topics of mathematics essay
we routinely find them here on planet Earth around
now with some kind of order with the simpler and
more elementary topics at the bottom and then as
we go up more and more complicated and fancy and
sophisticated topics and these little lines that
join topics are meant to represent some kind of
logical dependence so the line from here to here
is to suggest that this topic whatever it may be
is dependent on this topic in other words if
you want to learn this topic you had better
learn this topic first for example this might
be arithmetic with natural numbers so for me
arithmetic with natural numbers is pretty well
a primary fundamental mathematical topic one
of the very first things that you have to master
okay so maybe above here might be arithmetic with
say integers that's a slightly more advanced topic
that probably depends on knowing first arithmetic
with natural numbers and maybe here might be
arithmetic with integral poly numbers so the
idea is that in order to know arithmetic with
integral poly numbers you better know integer
arithmetic first and to know integer arithmetic
you better know natural number if they take first
okay so let's imagine this and let's imagine
that the primary school mathematical topics
are sort of at the band at the bottom and those
are the most elementary topics and then in some
band above them are the high school mathematical
topics and then above them are the undergraduate
mathematical topics and then the graduate
level topics and then there'll be a whole
bunch of research topics sitting above them and
in principle the tree kind of keeps going been up
and up actually it's not really a tree it's what
combinatorics call a partially ordered set okay so
that's a quite interesting but note that there
are some so I have strange topics interspersed
here and I'm suggesting that there might be some
problematic topics are floating around in here so
some of these topics might be very cut and dried
but there might be some problematic topics I claim
that there are in fact some problematic topics
and that they are roughly in this range in the
range sort of end of high school beginning of the
undergraduate all arguably some of them are even a
little bit earlier but there are a few important
problematic topics in this general hierarchy of
mathematics and they figure very prominently in
this discussion of rigor and the logic of modern
mathematics so let me be very clear and I'm going
to tell you what these problematic topics are okay
the first one is the foundations of Euclidean
geometry that is a problematic logical topic
to start Euclidean geometry properly is highly
highly difficult and I've talked already in this
series about that about the difficulties of the
foundations of Euclidean geometry and they are
there for sure the second one is this topic
of irrational numbers what is an irrational
number what are the operations on irrational
numbers what are the arithmetic allows that
these operations satisfy and how do we prove those
laws that is a very problematic topic irrational
numbers pretty well the same as real numbers
so we're talking about this this nature of the
continuum the problem of the the existence the
structure of real numbers are irrational numbers
a very serious headache another important logical
problem are the elementary trans and functions
the exponential function the logarithm function
the circular functions like cosine sine and tan
and the inverse functions of the circular
functions how to define these functions
how to prove their various properties also highly
problematic infinite sets and functions of course
these are very difficult and problematic topics
limits and integrals also turn out to be highly
problematic all of these notions are ones that
are encountered in high school and they're also
encountered later on at the college and university
level and here's unfortunately we're a strange
game occurs ok the strange game is that the buck
is passed back and forth by these two different
levels in the organization so when the students
encounter these things for the first time in high
school they're kind of told well you're getting
an introduction to these things you're not going
to get the official story there's going to be
gaps and that's alright later on at university
if you carry on with mathematics you will find
out more and you will find out the details the
answers to your questions about these topics
fine then the student keen on mathematics goes
to college and university and yes these topics
appear again but invariably it's assumed that
we pretty well know all of those things of course
you're already familiar with the cosine and sine
functions you learned about that back in high
school and you already know what a function
is we don't need to worry about the underlying
philosophical difficulties limits and integrals
we'll review those things maybe be a little bit
more precise about what limits are so the buck
is passed back and forth at the university level
we do not stop and say all right now we're going
to treat irrational numbers correctly we have a
course on irrational you can learn exactly what
an irrational number is you're going to learn
exactly how to add them and multiply them and
divide them and subtract them and you're going
to learn exactly how to prove the associative law
the distributive log bubbeleh know you don't get
that at all nothing even close most introductory
analysis texts just skim by this topic with just a
few hand waving remarks the student already knows
all these things so the end result is that these
problematic topics just sit there unacknowledged
and the student doesn't really know what to think
if they have some problems they think it's well
it's my own brain I just don't understand this
right I'm not smart enough that's not it at
all it's that the theory has not been presented
properly it's because it's very hard to present
the theory properly so unfortunately the logical
difficulties with these problematic topics are
ignored or finessed but of course they are still
there they don't go away just because you ignore
them so the consequences of that are reasonably
serious especially when it comes to the the level
of rigor in modern mathematics and the logical
coherence of the subject so as a consequence there
are these logically gray areas in crucial places
in this hierarchy of mathematics there are these
gray areas that contain these problematic topics
and these areas are served swimming around at the
high school undergraduate level almost below the
radar view of the research level mathematicians
who consider it too demeaning to to worry about
such lowly things so the typical mathematician who
is working up here typical research mathematician
say he's figured out a way of going from from this
point to this point here some elaborate new theory
that goes from here to here so this mathematician
thinks of his proof in terms of an argument that
goes from here to here he does not think of the
proof as an argument that goes from here to here
but that is in fact the crucial thing the crucial
question is is there an argument that goes from
the beginning of the subject to where you want
to go well proofs which cannot be traced down to
first principles abound in mathematics in fact
almost all of them these days are of that kind
because when you try to trace the proofs down
down down down you get to these gray areas and
mathematicians instinctively know that that these
gray areas you can't cross them so successfully
you have to start waffling when you get to them
and so mathematicians don't even attempt to do
this they just deem it sufficient to be able
to go from here to here so the journal articles
the seminars the conferences they're all about
going from here to here going from here to here
going from here to here a logical continuity in
the sense of Euclid in a sense of starting from
the beginning and having a continuous logical
stream may be long each step legitimate each step
carefully checked from the beginning to where you
want to go that is almost non-existent in most
areas of mathematics these days the result a
lot of confused students because the students get
confused by this and a lot of theorems which are
theorems in name only and they are not really
theorems they don't work logically if God was
marking them out of one most of them would get
zero so you can see that we have some work ahead
of us we're going to have to deal with these
things we're going to have to look carefully
at these problematic topics see if we can fix
things but first of all we have to understand
what the problems are try not to avoid them
but have a good look directly at the problems
and acknowledge what is there next time we are
going to get down to that more mathematical a
SPECT by looking at irrational numbers or starting
towards irrational numbers I'm going to look first
of all at the relationship between fractions and
decimal numbers that will be a good practice for
us to get going in terms of understanding
or trying to understand the problems with
irrational numbers so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening